# MY_SQL_retail_sales-Project

🛒 Retail Sales Analysis using SQL (MySQL)
📌 **Project Overview**
This project focuses on Retail Sales Data Analysis using MySQL.
The goal is to clean raw sales data, explore key metrics, and answer important business questions using SQL queries.

**The analysis helps understand:**

1.Sales performance
2.Customer behavior
3.Category-wise trends
4.Time-based sales patterns

**Tools & Technologies**

Database: MySQL
Language: SQL
Data Source: CSV file (Retail Sales Dataset)
Environment: MySQL Workbench


 **Database & Table Structure**
Database
CREATE DATABASE sales_db;
USE sales_db;

**Table: retail_sales**
Column Name	Data Type	Description
transactions_id	INT (PK)	Unique transaction ID
sale_date	DATE	Date of sale
sale_time	TIME	Time of sale
customer_id	INT	Customer ID
gender	VARCHAR(15)	Customer gender
age	INT	Customer age
category	VARCHAR(25)	Product category
quantiy	INT	Quantity sold
price_per_unit	FLOAT	Price per unit
cogs	FLOAT	Cost of goods sold
total_sale	FLOAT	Total transaction value

**Data Cleaning Process**
The following steps were performed to ensure data quality:

1.Identified NULL values in critical columns

2.Removed rows with missing values in:
           1.quantity
           2.price_per_unit
           3.cogs
           4.total_sale
           

**Verified total record count after cleaning**
DELETE FROM retail_sales
WHERE quantiy IS NULL
   OR price_per_unit IS NULL
   OR cogs IS NULL
   OR total_sale IS NULL;

**Data Exploration**
Key exploration questions:

1.Total number of sales
2.Total unique customers
3.Category-wise order volume

📊 **Business Questions & SQL Analysis**

Q1. **Write a SQL query to retrieve all columns for sales made on '2022-11-05.**
Sales on a specific date Retrieve all sales made on 5th November 2022.
```sql
SELECT 
    *
FROM
    retail_sales
WHERE
    sale_date = '2022-11-05';
```
Q2. **Write a SQL query to retrieve all transactions where the category is 'Clothing' and the quantity sold is more than 10 in the month of Nov-2022.**
High-quantity clothing sales Find Clothing category transactions with higher quantity sold in Nov 2022.
```
SELECT 
    *
FROM
    retail_sales
WHERE
    category = 'Clothing'
        AND sale_date >= '2022-11-01'
        AND sale_date < '2022-12-01'
        AND quantiy >= 2;
```
Q3. **Write a SQL query to calculate the total sales (total_sale) for each category.**
Total sales by category Calculate total revenue generated by each product category.
```
SELECT 
    category,
    SUM(total_sale) AS total_sales,
    COUNT(*) AS total_order
FROM
    retail_sales
GROUP BY category;

```
Q4.  **Write a SQL query to find the average age of customers who purchased items from the 'Beauty' category.**
Customer demographics Find the average age of customers purchasing Beauty products.
```
SELECT 
    category, ROUND(AVG(age), 2) AS avg_age
FROM
    retail_sales
WHERE
    category = 'Beauty';

```

Q5. ** Write a SQL query to find all transactions where the total_sale is greater than 1000.**
High-value transactions Identify transactions where total_sale > 1000.
```
SELECT 
    transactions_id, total_sale
FROM
    retail_sales
WHERE
    total_sale > 1000;

```
Q6. **Write a SQL query to find the total number of transactions (transaction_id) made by each gender in each category.**
Gender-based analysis Count total transactions by gender and category.

```sql
SELECT 
    category,
    gender,
    COUNT(transactions_id) AS total_transactions
FROM
    retail_sales
GROUP BY category , gender
ORDER BY 1 ;

```
Q7.**Write a SQL query to calculate the average sale for each month. Find out best selling month in each year.** 
Time-based performance
Calculate average monthly sales
Identify the best-selling month for each year using window functions.
```sql
SELECT 
     YEAR,
     MONTH,
     avg_sales 
		FROM(
   SELECT 
        YEAR(sale_date) AS year,
		MONTH(sale_date) AS month ,
	    ROUND(AVG(total_sale),2) as avg_sales,
        RANK() OVER(PARTITION BY YEAR(sale_date) 
        order by avg(total_sale) DESC ) as rnk
      FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY  YEAR , MONTH
)t
WHERE rnk = 1
ORDER BY YEAR ;
```

Q8.** Write a SQL query to find the top 5 customers based on the highest total sales.** 
Top customers Find the Top 5 customers based on highest total sales.
```sql
SELECT 
    customer_id, SUM(total_sale) AS total_sale
FROM
    retail_sales
GROUP BY 1
ORDER BY 2 DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

Q9. **Write a SQL query to find the number of unique customers who purchased items from each category.**
Customer reach Calculate unique customers per category.
```sql
SELECT 
    category, COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) AS cnt_unique_customer
FROM
    retail_sales
GROUP BY category;
```

Q10.**Write a SQL query to create each shift and number of orders (Example Morning <=12, Afternoon Between 12 & 17, Evening >17)**
Sales shift analysis Classify sales into:
Morning: < 12
Afternoon: 12–17
Evening: > 17
Then calculate number of orders per shift.
```sql
with hourly_sales
	as(
select *,
case
when hour(sale_time) <12 then 'Morning'
when hour(sale_time) between 12 and 17 then 'Afternoon'
else 
' Evening'
end as Shift
from retail_sales
 ) select customer_id,Shift,count(transactions_id) as total_order from hourly_sales
 group by customer_id, Shift
 order by customer_id ;
```


**Key Insights**

1. Certain categories consistently generate higher revenue.
2. Sales performance varies significantly by month and year.
3. A small group of customers contributes a large portion of total sales.
4. Afternoon and Evening shifts show higher transaction volume.

**Conclusion**

**This project demonstrates how SQL can be used for real-world business analysis, covering:**
       1.Data cleaning
       2.Aggregations
       3.Window functions
       4.Time-based analysis
       5.Customer segmentation
It reflects practical skills required for Data Analyst / SQL Developer roles.
